blog/2023-02-elasticSearch/index.md, before:

---
title: "ElasticSearch"
path: "/blog/2023-02-elasticSearch"
date: "2023-02-28T23:25:00"
author: minajanicijevic
---

## Find Linked Data Entities Fast with TriplyDB's Elastic Search

Are you looking for a way to search through your linked data entities quickly and efficiently? TriplyDB has got you covered with its powerful Elastic search feature!

With Elastic search, you can easily search for your linked data entities by using a simple search bar. To get started, go to Services, select ElasticSearch, and create the service. Once the service is running, the Elastic search option will appear above "Graphs" on the left bar.

![create elasticSearch service](createService.png)


Clicking on the Elastic search option will open up an integrated search bar, allowing you to search for linked data entities with ease. Simply enter a single search term and the text search API will provide you with a list of relevant linked data entities based on that search term. The search term is matched against the text in literals and IRIs in the linked data description of the returned entities.

Once you have your search results, the linked data entities are displayed in a clear and readable format. Each entity is accompanied by a label and a link to the TriplyDB browser. Additionally, a description and the type of the result are provided. If available, an image or video may also be displayed to provide you with a complete overview of what you might be looking for.

![elasticSearch results](elasticSearch.png)

But that's not all! You can also customize your searches to fit your specific needs. By clicking on the "Query" option, you can specify your own Elasticsearch query and use the API-link to access it from outside TriplyDB.

This powerful feature of TriplyDB enables users to quickly and easily search for linked data entities based on their own criteria, making data exploration and analysis much more efficient.

![make a custom query](customQuery.png)

Overall, TriplyDB's Elastic search feature is a valuable tool for anyone working with linked data, providing fast and effective search capabilities for exploring and analyzing data. 

Want to see ElasticSearch in action? Click on [this](https://triplydb.com/smithsonian/american-art-museum/elasticsearch/american-art-museum-1/text) link to navigate to the page where you can try it out for yourself. Give it a try today and see how ElasticSearch can enhance your linked data workflow, making it faster and more efficient than ever before!

Commit message:

UNIFIED: writing of the Elasticsearch
Based on the [Elasticsearch guide](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/index.html), the official terminology /name is Elasticsearch.

blog/2023-02-elasticSearch/index.md, after:

---
title: "Elasticsearch"
path: "/blog/2023-02-elasticSearch"
date: "2023-02-28T23:25:00"
author: minajanicijevic
---

## Find Linked Data Entities Fast with TriplyDB's Elasticsearch

Are you looking for a way to search through your linked data entities quickly and efficiently? TriplyDB has got you covered with its powerful Elasticsearch feature!

With Elasticsearch, you can easily search for your linked data entities by using a simple search bar. To get started, go to Services, select Elasticsearch, and create the service. Once the service is running, the Elasticsearch option will appear above "Graphs" on the left bar.

![create elasticSearch service](createService.png)


Clicking on the Elasticsearch option will open up an integrated search bar, allowing you to search for linked data entities with ease. Simply enter a single search term and the text search API will provide you with a list of relevant linked data entities based on that search term. The search term is matched against the text in literals and IRIs in the linked data description of the returned entities.

Once you have your search results, the linked data entities are displayed in a clear and readable format. Each entity is accompanied by a label and a link to the TriplyDB browser. Additionally, a description and the type of the result are provided. If available, an image or video may also be displayed to provide you with a complete overview of what you might be looking for.

![elasticSearch results](elasticSearch.png)

But that's not all! You can also customize your searches to fit your specific needs. By clicking on the "Query" option, you can specify your own Elasticsearch query and use the API-link to access it from outside TriplyDB.

This powerful feature of TriplyDB enables users to quickly and easily search for linked data entities based on their own criteria, making data exploration and analysis much more efficient.

![make a custom query](customQuery.png)

Overall, TriplyDB's Elasticsearch feature is a valuable tool for anyone working with linked data, providing fast and effective search capabilities for exploring and analyzing data. 

Want to see Elasticsearch in action? Click on [this](https://triplydb.com/smithsonian/american-art-museum/elasticsearch/american-art-museum-1/text) link to navigate to the page where you can try it out for yourself. Give it a try today and see how Elasticsearch can enhance your linked data workflow, making it faster and more efficient than ever before!
