docs/triply-etl/transform/index.md, before:

---
title: "2. TriplyETL: Transform"
path: "/docs/triply-etl/transform"
---

The **Transform** step makes changes to the Record:

```mermaid
graph LR
  source -- 1. Extract --> record
  record -- 2. Transform --> record
  record -- 3. Assert --> ld
  ld -- 4. Enrich --> ld
  ld -- 5. Validate --> ld
  ld -- 6. Publish --> tdb

  linkStyle 1 stroke:red,stroke-width:3px;
  ld[Internal Store]
  record[Record]
  source[Data Sources]
  tdb[(Triple Store)]
```

If you do not have a stream of records yet, read the documentation for the [**Extract** step](/docs/triply-etl/extract) first.

Once you have a stream of records, the following transformations are typically made:
- Clean up the source data.
- Combining different values from the source data into one new value.
- Splitting a single value from the source data into multiple new values.

TriplyETL supports the following transformation approaches:

- 2A. [**RATT**](/docs/triply-etl/transform/ratt) transformations are a set of commonly used transformation functions that are developed and maintained by Triply.
- 2B. [**TypeScript**](/docs/triply-etl/transform/typescript) can be used to write new customer transformations.

## Next steps

The Transform step results in a cleaned and enriched record.  The following link documents how you can use the record to make linked data assertions:

-  [3. **Assert**](/docs/triply-etl/assert) uses data from the Record to generate linked data in the Internal Store.

Commit message:

CLEAN: Removed old RATT docs.

docs/triply-etl/transform/index.md, after:

---
title: "2. TriplyETL: Transform"
path: "/docs/triply-etl/transform"
---

The **Transform** step makes changes to the Record:

```mermaid
graph LR
  source -- 1. Extract --> record
  record -- 2. Transform --> record
  record -- 3. Assert --> ld
  ld -- 4. Enrich --> ld
  ld -- 5. Validate --> ld
  ld -- 6. Publish --> tdb

  linkStyle 1 stroke:red,stroke-width:3px;
  ld[Internal Store]
  record[Record]
  source[Data Sources]
  tdb[(Triple Store)]
```

If you do not have a stream of records yet, read the documentation for the [**Extract** step](/docs/triply-etl/extract) first.

Once you have a stream of records, the following transformations are typically needed:
- Values need to be mapped onto a prepared list of IRIs or literals (e.g. from country names to country-denoting IRIs).
- Values need to be translated into standards-compliant formats (e.g., from country name to ISO 3166 country codes).
- Multiple existing values need to be combined into one new value (e.g., street name and house number may be combined into an address).
- A single value needs to be split into multiple values (e.g., from `'apple, orange'` to `'apple'` and `'orange'`).
- Values need to be cleaned because they are dirty in the source (e.g., from `'001 '` to `1`).

TriplyETL supports the following transformation approaches:

- 2A. [**RATT**](/docs/triply-etl/transform/ratt) transformations are a set of commonly used transformation functions that are developed and maintained by Triply.
- 2B. [**TypeScript**](/docs/triply-etl/transform/typescript) can be used to write new customer transformations.



## Next steps

The Transform step results in a cleaned and enriched record.  The following link documents how you can use the record to make linked data assertions:

-  [3. **Assert**](/docs/triply-etl/assert) uses data from the Record to generate linked data in the Internal Store.
