docs/ratt/index.md, before:

---
title: "RATT"
path: "/docs/ratt"
---

**<span style="color:red">Note: RATT license is included in a TriplyDB license. Contact info@triply.cc for more information</span>**


# Introduction
RATT is a typescript based script that allows transforming different types of data to linked data.   
Extract-Transform-Load (ETL)

# ETL example <!-- Create a short ETL example with core concepts, making it easier for a user to understand what an ETL is. -->

#Core Concepts <!-- Maybe move to a different space in the documentation -->

# ETL Structure
## Extract

RATT uses connectors to tap into data from various sources.  This section explains how different kinds of sources can be connected to RATT.

Pro Tip: It is important to never change a data source manually.  Since manual changes cannot be stored, reproduced or rolled back they are always a bad idea.  Instead, try to perform all modifications in RATT.  That way your changes are stored in the Git history of your RATT repository.  It is also possible to roll back your changes if needed.

### Source data connectors for static files

Source data is often available in static files.  For example one or more Excel files with tabular data.

#### Upload static source data as TriplyDB Assets

If your ETL needs to connect to static data files, it is best practice to first upload these as [TriplyDB Assets](#todo).  This has the following benefits:

1. **Shareable** TriplyDB Assets can be added to any TriplyDB Dataset.  This means that collaborators that have access to a dataset will also have access to the static data files that are needed to create the linked data in that dataset.
2. **Secure** TriplyDB Assets are accessible under the same access levels as the TriplyDB Dataset to which they belong.  This means that you can share static data files in a secure way with your collaborators.
3. **Versioned** TriplyDB Assets are versioned.  If a new version of the same static file becomes available, this file can be uploaded to the same TriplyDB Asset.  If there are problems with the new data files them your collaborators can always roll back to an earlier version of the source data.
4. **Transparent** All collaborators have access to the same TriplyDB Assets.  This makes it transparent which static data files are needed, and which versions are available.  This is much more transparent than having to share (versions of) files over email or by other indirect means.
5. **Backed-up** TriplyDB instances that are maintained by Triply are also backed up regularly.  This includes the static data files that are uploaded as TriplyDB Assets.  This is much more secure than storing static data files on a local laptop that can break, or where files can get lost otherwise.

#### Connect to Microsoft Excel (XLSX) files

Microsoft Excel (file name extension `.xlsx`) is a popular file format for storing static tabular source data.

RATT has a dedicated connector for Excel files.  After your Excel files [are uploaded as TriplyDB Assets](#section-2-1), RATT can connect to them as follows:

```ts
app.use(
  mw.fromXlsx(Ratt.Source.triplyDb.asset('my-account', 'my-dataset', {name: 'my-table.xlsx'}))
)
```

#### Source data connector for Comma Separated Values (CSV) files

Comma Separated Values (file name extension `.csv`) is a popular file format for storing static tabular source data.

RATT has a dedicated connector for Excel files.  After your CSV files are [compressed](#todo) and [uploaded as TriplyDB Assets](#todo), RATT can connect to them as follows:

```ts
app.use(
  mw.fromCsv(Ratt.Source.triplyDb.asset('my-account', 'my-dataset', {name: 'my-table.csv.gz'}))
)
```

##### Comma Separated Values (CSV) support

RATT supports the official CSV standard: [RFC 4180](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4180).  Unfortunately, there are some 'CSV' files our there that do not follow the RFC 4180 standard.  If your 'CSV' file does not follow the official CSV standard, then RATT may or may not process your static data file correctly.

#### Use multiple static files in one data sources

It is also possible to use more than one static file in a data source.

Here is an example where two CSV files are used:

```ts
app.use(
  mw.fromCsv([
    Ratt.Source.triplyDb.asset('my-account', 'my-dataset', {name: 'my-table-1.csv.gz'}),
    Ratt.Source.triplyDb.asset('my-account', 'my-dataset', {name: 'my-table-2.csv.gz'}),
  ]),
)
```

This also works when static files are specified in the [RATT context]():

```ts
const app = new Ratt({
  sources: {
    table1: Ratt.Source.triplyDb.asset('my-account', 'my-dataset', {name: 'my-table-1.csv.gz'}),
    table2: Ratt.Source.triplyDb.asset('my-account', 'my-dataset', {name: 'my-table-2.csv.gz'}),
  }
})
app.use(
  mw.fromCsv([app.sources.table1,
              app.sources.table2]),
)
```

#### File compression for plain text files

It is best practice to compress static files that are plain text files. Compression is applied prior to uploading such files are [TriplyDB Assets](#).

The following command shows how a local CSV file can be compressed using GNU Zip (`.gz`):

```sh
$ gzip my-table.csv
```

Running this command will replace file `my-table.csv` with file `my-table.csv.gz`.

#### Using a local file

Some people like to work with local files.  This is generally a bad idea, because your work cannot be shared with others.  Still, if you understand the implications of using local files, you can connect them to your ETL.

The following example connects a local CSV file to an ETL:

```ts
app.use(
  mw.fromCsv(Ratt.Source.file('my-table.csv.gz')),
)
```

#### Use data from publically accessible URLs

Some people like to work with publically accessible URLs on the Internet.  This is generally a bad idea, because this cannot be used for data that is not known to have a public license.  Because a lot of data has no clear license, this approach can almost never be used legitimately.  Still, if you understand the implications of using publicly accessible URLs, you can connect them to your ETL.

The following example connects to a remote CSV file from a public URL from RATT:

```ts
app.use(
  mw.fromCsv(Ratt.Source.url('https://example.com/my-table.csv.gz')),
)
```

Commit message:

added assumptions for prior knowledge and some comments

docs/ratt/index.md, after:

---
title: "RATT"
path: "/docs/ratt"
---

**<span style="color:red">Note: RATT license is included in a TriplyDB license. Contact info@triply.cc for more information</span>**


# Introduction
RATT is a typescript based script that allows transforming different types of data to linked data. <!-- shortly mention Extract-Transform-Load (ETL) here as well -->

This documentation **assumes prior knowledge**:
- Typescript knowledge (node.js/yarn packages) <!--Maybe add some documentation about most used commands, or links to external documentation. --> 
- Limited familiarity with linked data and TriplyDB


# ETL example <!-- Create a short ETL example with core concepts, making it easier for a user to understand what an ETL is. -->

#Core Concepts <!-- Maybe move to a different space in the documentation -->

# ETL Structure
## Extract

RATT uses connectors to tap into data from various sources.  This section explains how different kinds of sources can be connected to RATT.

Pro Tip: It is important to never change a data source manually.  Since manual changes cannot be stored, reproduced or rolled back they are always a bad idea.  Instead, try to perform all modifications in RATT.  That way your changes are stored in the Git history of your RATT repository.  It is also possible to roll back your changes if needed.

### Source data connectors for static files

Source data is often available in static files.  For example one or more Excel files with tabular data.

#### Upload static source data as TriplyDB Assets

If your ETL needs to connect to static data files, it is best practice to first upload these as [TriplyDB Assets](#todo).  This has the following benefits:

1. **Shareable** TriplyDB Assets can be added to any TriplyDB Dataset.  This means that collaborators that have access to a dataset will also have access to the static data files that are needed to create the linked data in that dataset.
2. **Secure** TriplyDB Assets are accessible under the same access levels as the TriplyDB Dataset to which they belong.  This means that you can share static data files in a secure way with your collaborators.
3. **Versioned** TriplyDB Assets are versioned.  If a new version of the same static file becomes available, this file can be uploaded to the same TriplyDB Asset.  If there are problems with the new data files them your collaborators can always roll back to an earlier version of the source data.
4. **Transparent** All collaborators have access to the same TriplyDB Assets.  This makes it transparent which static data files are needed, and which versions are available.  This is much more transparent than having to share (versions of) files over email or by other indirect means.
5. **Backed-up** TriplyDB instances that are maintained by Triply are also backed up regularly.  This includes the static data files that are uploaded as TriplyDB Assets.  This is much more secure than storing static data files on a local laptop that can break, or where files can get lost otherwise.

#### Connect to Microsoft Excel (XLSX) files

Microsoft Excel (file name extension `.xlsx`) is a popular file format for storing static tabular source data.

RATT has a dedicated connector for Excel files.  After your Excel files [are uploaded as TriplyDB Assets](#section-2-1), RATT can connect to them as follows:

```ts
app.use(
  mw.fromXlsx(Ratt.Source.triplyDb.asset('my-account', 'my-dataset', {name: 'my-table.xlsx'}))
)
```

#### Source data connector for Comma Separated Values (CSV) files

Comma Separated Values (file name extension `.csv`) is a popular file format for storing static tabular source data.

RATT has a dedicated connector for Excel files.  After your CSV files are [compressed](#todo) and [uploaded as TriplyDB Assets](#todo), RATT can connect to them as follows:

```ts
app.use(
  mw.fromCsv(Ratt.Source.triplyDb.asset('my-account', 'my-dataset', {name: 'my-table.csv.gz'}))
)
```

##### Comma Separated Values (CSV) support

RATT supports the official CSV standard: [RFC 4180](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4180).  Unfortunately, there are some 'CSV' files our there that do not follow the RFC 4180 standard.  If your 'CSV' file does not follow the official CSV standard, then RATT may or may not process your static data file correctly.

#### Use multiple static files in one data sources

It is also possible to use more than one static file in a data source.

Here is an example where two CSV files are used:

```ts
app.use(
  mw.fromCsv([
    Ratt.Source.triplyDb.asset('my-account', 'my-dataset', {name: 'my-table-1.csv.gz'}),
    Ratt.Source.triplyDb.asset('my-account', 'my-dataset', {name: 'my-table-2.csv.gz'}),
  ]),
)
```

This also works when static files are specified in the [RATT context]():

```ts
const app = new Ratt({
  sources: {
    table1: Ratt.Source.triplyDb.asset('my-account', 'my-dataset', {name: 'my-table-1.csv.gz'}),
    table2: Ratt.Source.triplyDb.asset('my-account', 'my-dataset', {name: 'my-table-2.csv.gz'}),
  }
})
app.use(
  mw.fromCsv([app.sources.table1,
              app.sources.table2]),
)
```

#### File compression for plain text files

It is best practice to compress static files that are plain text files. Compression is applied prior to uploading such files are [TriplyDB Assets](#).

The following command shows how a local CSV file can be compressed using GNU Zip (`.gz`):

```sh
$ gzip my-table.csv
```

Running this command will replace file `my-table.csv` with file `my-table.csv.gz`.

#### Using a local file

Some people like to work with local files.  This is generally a bad idea, because your work cannot be shared with others.  Still, if you understand the implications of using local files, you can connect them to your ETL.

The following example connects a local CSV file to an ETL:

```ts
app.use(
  mw.fromCsv(Ratt.Source.file('my-table.csv.gz')),
)
```

#### Use data from publically accessible URLs

Some people like to work with publically accessible URLs on the Internet.  This is generally a bad idea, because this cannot be used for data that is not known to have a public license.  Because a lot of data has no clear license, this approach can almost never be used legitimately.  Still, if you understand the implications of using publicly accessible URLs, you can connect them to your ETL.

The following example connects to a remote CSV file from a public URL from RATT:

```ts
app.use(
  mw.fromCsv(Ratt.Source.url('https://example.com/my-table.csv.gz')),
)
```
